title: How about herring for lunch?
tags: old-blog
category: progress
subsite: grid-framework
---

Another progress update: `WorldToGrid` and `GridToWorld` are now implemented.
For those who don't know, those two functions convert a point's coordinates
from world space to grid space, the coordinate system used to locate points
relative to the grid's properties, and back. For rectangular grids it's a
fairly simple idea, the grid can be represented as a standard Cartesian
coordinate system.  With hex grids that won't do it, you simply cannot force a
hex grid into a Cartesian coordinate system, you need to find something else.
Fortunately there are several topologically identical possibilities with
easier, more intuitive coordinate systems. For the first release I have decided
to use the herringbone pattern:

![some image](herring.png)

The vertices of this pattern are the faces of the hex grid. This means the
central face has coordinates (0, 0, Z) and the face north-east of it has the
coordinates (1, 0, Z). This way each single point of the hex grid can be
canonically identified by its coordinates. "Canonically" means that no two
points have the same coordinates and no two coordinates represent the same
point. As a side effect this gives me an all new grid to work with, although
the herringbone grid will have to wait until later before it gets the proper
treatment.

This brings me almost concludes the hex grid development. The only things left
now are the vertex matrix methods, testing and fixing everything to make sure
it's reliable and then writing the documentation.

