title: Status update and Doxygen rant
tags: old-blog, rant
---

It has been two weeks since my last update, so I wanted to let you guys know
what I am currently at. The good news is that the new coordinate systems have
been implemented and are ready to use. Of course there is still the obligatory
last check to do, but i expect everything to be fine. All methods that got the
axe are now gone as well and have been put into extension methods and ZIPped
into archives; that way no one will accidentally use the deprecated API. I also
added a section called Legacy Support to the manual with instructions.

Now for the promised rant. I have transitioned all the documentation to
Doxygen, both scripting reference and user manual. Now all that would be left
would be to sprinkle some CSS fairy dust on top of it so it looks nice and I'm
done. Except editing the CSS is an exercise in pure trial & error frustration,
there is no documentation for it and the code is barely commented. The manual
is a pain in the butt as well, it's like it was written for people who already
know how to use Doxygen. It will go into detail about all the possible ways of
formating my text, but it doesn't explain how to get the text into the manual
in a specific order. Don't worry, I got it all covered now, but it was not a
fun journey.

I wanted to slim down the default HTML design, because I think the large header
buttons at the top are too large and vibrant, but I've had it with Doxygen.
Don't get me wrong, it's a great system and I'm sure everything made perfect
sense when writing it, but it is obscure from the outside. Anyway, I'm going to
stick with the default design for now, but at least I limited the size of
images so they don't disrupt the flow of the text. There probably won't be any
PDF documentation anymore though, the HTML is more flexible to read and
navigate, plus the PDF generated by Doxygen looks rather... ugly.

Now that I've got everything out of the way it's time to wrap it up and
hopefully get it released next week.
