title: Grid Framework version 1.2.2 released
tags: old-blog
category: release
---

Update time. Let's go over what's new:

**New example:** sliding block puzzle

![Screenshot of sliding puzzle example](sliding-puzzle.png)

It might not look like much, but this is the most advanced example yet; it's
similar to the movement with obstacles example where we use a matrix to store
which tiles are allowed and which are forbidden. The tricky part is that now
objects can span more than one tile and all of them have to be free. The
solution is to break up the obstacle into one tile large parts, then check them
all individually and finally assemble the answer from the individual answers.

The end result is that it feels like collision without actually using
collision. Now, you might be wondering why not just use actual collision
detection? For one, Unity's collision detection requires you to move objects
through the physics engine instead of directly. This means instead of moving
the block like you would in real life you need to use force, like dragging the
block with a rubber band. This feels just wrong, especially on a touch device.
If you move objects directly (i.e. using their Transform component) the physics
engine is likely to miss intersections. The other reason is that Unity's
collision detection just isn't made for packing objects together this tightly,
sooner or later things will just randomly  fly in all directions like the
puzzle exploded or something.

Don't get me wrong, PhysiX was certainly developed by talented people who know
more than I do, but it was written with 3D action games in mind and trying to
get it to work in such a scenario is like trying to fit a square peg into a
round hole; you might get it to kind of work well enough eventually, but in the
time it took you you might as well have written your own solution which you
have proper control over. Thanks to Grid Framework we can automate all the unit
conversion between world space and grid coordinates.

**Changes:** I removed the minimumSpacing (rectangular grids) and minimumRadius
(hex grids) variables because they were stupid. The reason why they existed in
the first place was to prevent the user from setting too low or nonsensical
values for spacing and radius. The proper way to do this would be to use
accessors (also called properties), but Unity's editor scripting documentation
is rather lacking, so I couldn't figure out how to make the values not reset
all the time.

I finally found the solution (that's a topic for another time) and now I
hardcoded a lower limit of 0.1 for both. I think that's a reasonable value, but
if you need to go lower please let me know. The way it works now is that if you
try to set the value to anything lower than 0.1 it will automatically default
to 0.1. I was also able to get rid of other ugly parts inside the source code
and clean things up thanks to accessors, but I don't think you will notice any
difference

In terms of scripting this has no real consequences for you, just use spacing
and radius like you did before.

**Fixes:** One major bug was a typo that could prevent the project from
building. I also removed the redundant "Use Custom Rendering Range" flag from
the inspector, now opening or closing the "Custom Rendering Range" foldout
toggles the value (in terms of scripting the variable still exists, it's just
the way you set it in the inspector). Speaking of inspector and foldout,
previously the state of the "Draw & Render Settings" foldout reset each time
you entered or exited play mode. Now the settings will stick and it will be
individual for each grid type. There is also the obligatory under-the-hoods
improvements, but there is nothing particular worth mentioning there.
