title: Polar grid drawing refined
tags: old-blog
category: progress
---

Hello again

Last time I showed a preview of polar grids it was a full cycle starting from
the origin containing all layers up to the edge. During runtime if only part of
the grid is visible to the player rendering the whole thing can be a waste of
resources, that's why you have the option of specifying a specific rendering
range.

I was trying out several approaches of interpreting the rectangular range, but
in the end I went for a polar approach. What does this mean? You have two
Vector3 values, one called renderFrom, the other called renderTo. The
x-coordinate tells what radius to start and end at, the y-coordinate gives us
the starting and ending angle and the z-coordinate gives us the starting and
ending layer. Here is an example of what if can look like:

![some image](polar-refined.png)

The only limitations are that the starting radius cannot be less than 0 and
starting values cannot be larger than ending values (and vice-versa). The only
exception is the angle, this is is necessary in order to  be able to draw a
sector from, let's say 300째 to 15째 (which can be seen as from 300째 to 375째).

This has been the biggest roadblock so far, now I need to do some proper
testing and final polish, write the new documentation and I can submit the
update to Unity. Supporting a new type of grid is a substantial effort and,
since everything is interconnected, it usually requires going through the code
for the other grids as well. Sometimes parts that seemed general enough might
need to be overridden and other parts that seemed very specific become more
general and need to be moved up the hierarchy. Considering this and the updates
since the release of version 12.0 I believe raising the price to from 20$ to
25$ is appropriate.

Of course, as usual, if you already bought Grid Framework all updates are free
for you. If you intend to buy Grid Framework, now is the chance to still get it
for the lower price. You don't need to rush and get it immediately though, I'll
post an at least one more update before I submit version 1.3.0.

As always, thank you for your support

HiPhish
