title: Grid Framework version 1.1.10 released
tags: old-blog
category: release
---

The 1.1.10 update brings in a new function, ScaleVector3(Vector scl) : Vector3
which takes in a vector and then scales it so it fits inside the grid. This is
similar to AlignVector3, which was introduced in the last update, to allow
performing the aligning and scaling without having to provide an actual
Transform.

In other news, the hex grids are almost done. All the functionality has been
written, now I need to clean everything up and write the documentation. Hex
grids will be officially introduced in the 1.2.0 update, which I expect to
release within the next week or, if something goes wrong, the week after.
Unfortunately, due to all the work I have put into Grid Framework since the
first release I cannot charge 15$ anymore, starting with 1.2.0 the price will
be raised to 20$, so if you want a copy of Grid Framework, now is the time to
get it. When I originally released Grid Framework there were still many loose
ends and it was not integrated well into the workflow. When you downloaded it
from the Asset Store you had to move files manually in place, there were no
menu entries, you had to drag a script manually onto objects, there was no
custom inspector panel, there was no rendering, no Vectrosity support and less
examples included. Over the time I have been addressing all these shortcomings
and improving, but none on its own felt like they were justifying a price
increase. With hex grids I'm bringing in a major functionality update and I
believe the 20$ price tag is still well justified. Of course anyone who has
already purchased Grid Framework will get this and all future updates for free,
that was the deal when I first launched it and nothing is going to change about
that.
